"Feeling Is The Secret,"
by Neville Goddard.
Read by Adam Hammond.
In this volume, Neville has succeeded
in describing how through our
imagination and our feelings
we consciously or unconsciously
mold outer circumstance
in harmony with our inner nature.
Here, he has given us a simple formula
to realize our desires.
Originally published by GMJ
Publishing Company in 1944.
This recording is a production
of the Master Key Society.
Copyright 2021 Master Key Society.
"Of making many books, there
is no end," Ecclesiastes 12:12.
He that would perfect himself
in any art whatsoever,
let him betake himself to
the reading of some sure
and certain work upon
his art many times over.
For to read many books upon your art
produceth confusion rather
than learning, old saying.
Foreword.
This book is concerned
with the art of realizing your desire.
It gives you an account
of the mechanism used
in the production of the visible world.
It is a small book, but not slight.
There is a treasure in it,
a clearly defined road to the
realization of your dreams.
Were it possible to carry
conviction to another
by means of reasoned arguments
and detailed instances,
this book would be many times its size.
It is seldom possible, however, to do so
by means of written
statements or arguments
since to the suspended judgment
it always seems plausible to say that
the author was dishonest or diluted,
and therefore his evidence was tainted.
Consequently,
I have purposely omitted all
arguments and testimonials
and simply challenge
the open-minded reader
to practice the law of consciousness
as revealed in this book.
Personal success will
prove far more convincing
than all the books that could
be written on the subject.
Neville
Chapter one.
Law and Its Operation.
The world and all within it,
is man's conditioned
consciousness objectified.
Consciousness is the cause
as well as the substance
of the entire world.
So it is to consciousness
that we must turn
if we would discover
the secret of creation.
Knowledge of the law of consciousness
and the method of operating this law
will enable you to accomplish
all you desire in life.
Armed with a working
knowledge of this law,
you can build and maintain an ideal world.
Consciousness is the one and only reality,
not figuratively but actually.
This reality may for the sake of clarity,
be likened unto a stream, which
is divided into two parts,
the conscious and the subconscious.
In order to intelligently
operate the law of consciousness,
it is necessary to
understand the relationship
between the conscious
and the subconscious.
The conscious is personal and selective,
the subconscious is
impersonal and non-selective.
The conscious is the realm of effect,
the subconscious is the realm of cause.
These two aspects
are the male and female
divisions of consciousness.
The conscious is male, the
subconscious is female.
The conscious generates ideas
and impresses these ideas
on the subconscious.
The subconscious receives ideas
and gives form and expression to them.
By this law, first conceiving an idea
and then impressing the idea
conceived on the subconscious,
all things evolve out of consciousness.
And without this sequence
there is not anything made
that is made.
The conscious impresses the subconscious
while the subconscious expresses
all that is impressed upon it.
The subconscious does not originate ideas,
but accepts as true those
which the conscious mind
feels to be true and in a
way known only to itself
objectifies the accepted ideas.
Therefore, through his
power to imagine and feel
and his freedom to choose
the idea he will entertain,
man has control over creation.
Control of the subconscious
is accomplished
through control of your
ideas and feelings.
The mechanism of creation
is hidden in the very depth
of the subconscious, the female
aspect or womb of creation.
The subconscious transcends reason
and is independent of induction.
It contemplates a feeling as
a fact existing within itself
and on this assumption proceeds
to give expression to it.
The creative process begins with an idea
and its cycle runs its course as a feeling
and ends in a volition to act.
Ideas are impressed on the subconscious
through the medium of feeling.
No idea can be impressed
on the subconscious
until it is felt, but once felt,
be it good, bad or indifferent,
it must be expressed.
Feeling is the one and only medium
through which ideas are
conveyed to the subconscious.
Therefore, the man who does
not control his feeling
may easily impress the subconscious
with undesirable states.
By control of feeling
is not meant restraint or
suppression of your feeling,
but rather the disciplining of
self to imagine and entertain
only such feeling as
contributes to your happiness.
Control of your feeling is all important
to a full and happy life.
Never entertain an undesirable feeling
nor think sympathetically about
wrong in any shape or form.
Do not dwell on the imperfection
of yourself or others.
To do so is to impress the subconscious
with these limitations.
What you do not want done unto you
do not feel that it is
done unto you or another.
This is the whole law of
a full and happy life.
Everything else is commentary.
Every feeling makes a
subconscious impression
and unless it is counteracted
by a more powerful feeling
of an opposite nature
must be expressed.
The dominant of two feelings
is the one expressed.
I am healthy is a stronger
feeling than I will be healthy.
To feel I will be is to confess I am not.
I am is stronger than I am not.
What you feel you are always dominates
what you feel you would like to be,
therefore to be realized the
wish must be felt as a state
that is rather than a state that is not.
Sensation proceeds manifestation
and is the foundation upon
which all manifestation rests.
Be careful of your moods and feelings,
for there is an unbroken connection
between your feelings
and your visible world.
Your body is an emotional filter
and bears the unmistakable marks
of your prevalent emotions.
Emotional disturbances,
especially suppressed emotions
are the causes of all disease.
To feel intensely about a wrong
without voicing or expressing that feeling
is the beginning of disease,
dis-ease in both body and environment.
Do not entertain the
feeling of regret or failure
for frustration or detachment
from your objective results
in disease.
Think feelingly only of the
state you desire to realize.
Feeling the reality of the state sought
and living and acting on that conviction
is the way of all seeming miracles.
All changes of expression
are brought about
through a change of feeling.
A change of feeling is
a change of destiny.
All creation occurs in the
domain of the subconscious.
What you must acquire then
is a reflective control
of the operation of the subconscious,
that is control of your
ideas and feelings.
Chance or accident is not responsible
for the things that happen to
you nor is predestined fate
the author of your fortune or misfortune.
Your subconscious impressions
determine the conditions of your world.
The subconscious is not selective,
it is impersonal and no
respecter of persons.
The subconscious is not concerned
with the truth or falsity of your feeling.
It always accepts as true
that what you feel to be true.
Feeling is the ascent of the subconscious
to the truth of that which
is declared to be true.
Because of this quality
of the subconscious,
there was nothing impossible to man.
Whatever the mind of man can
conceive and feel as true,
the subconscious can and must objectify.
Your feelings create the pattern
from which your world is fashioned
and a change of feeling
is a change of pattern.
The subconscious never fails to express
that which has been impressed upon it.
The moment it receives an impression,
it begins to work out the
ways of its expression.
It accepts the feeling
impressed upon it, your feeling,
as a fact, existing within
itself and immediately sets about
to produce in the outer or objective world
the exact likeness of that feeling.
The subconscious never alters
the accepted beliefs of man
it out-pictures them to the last detail
whether or not they are beneficial.
To impress the subconscious
with the desirable state,
you must assume the
feeling that would be yours
had you already realized your wish.
In defining your objective,
you must be concerned only
with the objective itself.
The manner of expression or
the difficulties involved
are not to be considered by you.
To think feelingly on any state
impresses it on the subconscious.
Therefore, if you dwell on
difficulties, barriers, or delay
the subconscious by its
very non-selective nature
accepts the feeling of
difficulties and obstacles
as your request and
proceeds to produce them
in your outer world.
The subconscious is the womb of creation.
It receives the idea unto itself
through the feelings of man.
It never changes the idea received,
but always gives it form.
Hence the subconscious
out-pictures the idea
and the image and likeness
of the feeling received.
To feel a state as hopeless or impossible
is to impress the subconscious
with the idea of failure.
Although the subconscious
faithfully serves man,
it must not be inferred that the relation
is that of a servant to a master
as was anciently conceived.
The ancient prophets called it
the slave and servant of man.
St. Paul personified
it as a woman and said,
"The woman should be subject
to man in everything."
The subconscious does serve man
and faithfully gives form to his feelings.
However, the subconscious
has a distinct distaste
for compulsion and responds to persuasion
rather than to command.
Consequently, it
resembles the beloved wife
more than the servant.
The husband is head of
the wife, Ephesians 5,
may not be true of man and woman
in their earthly relationship,
but it is true of the
conscious and the subconscious
or the male and female
aspects of consciousness.
The mystery to which Paul
referred when he wrote,
"This is a great mystery.
"He that loveth his wife loveth himself
"and they two shall be one flesh,"
is simply the mystery of consciousness.
Consciousness is really one and undivided
but for creation's sake, it
appears to be divided into two.
The conscious, objective or
male aspect truly is the head
and dominates the subconscious,
subjective or female aspect.
However, this leadership
is not that of the tyrant,
but of the lover.
So by assuming the feeling
that would be yours
were you already in
possession of your objective,
the subconscious is moved to build
the exact likeness of your assumption.
Your desires are not
subconsciously accepted
until you assume the
feeling of their reality,
for only through feeling is an
idea subconsciously accepted
and only through this
subconscious acceptance
is it ever expressed.
It is easier to ascribe your
feeling to events in the world
than to admit that the
conditions of the world
reflect your feeling.
However, it is eternally true
that the outside mirrors the inside,
"As within so without."
A man can receive nothing,
unless it is given him from heaven.
And the kingdom of heaven is within you.
Nothing comes from without,
all things come from within,
from the subconscious.
It is impossible for you to see
other than the contents
of your consciousness.
Your world in its every detail
is your consciousness objectified.
Objective states bear witness
of subconscious impressions.
A change of impression results
in a change of expression.
The subconscious accepts as true
that which you feel as true
and because creation
is the result of subconscious impressions,
you by your feeling determine creation.
You are already that which you want to be
and your refusal to believe this
is the only reason you do not see it.
To seek on the outside for that
which you do not feel you
are is to seek in vain,
for we never find that which we want,
we find only that which we are.
In short, you express and have only that
which you are conscious
of being or possessing.
"To him that hath it is given."
Denying the evidence of the senses
and appropriating the
feeling of the wish fulfilled
is the way to the
realization of your desire.
Mastery of self control of
your thoughts and feelings
is your highest achievement.
However, until perfect
self control is attained,
so that in spite of appearances,
you feel all that you want
to feel use sleep and prayer
to aid you in realizing
your desired states.
These are the two gateways
into the subconscious.
Chapter two.
Sleep.
Sleep, the life that occupies
one third of our stay on earth
is the natural door into the subconscious.
So it is with sleep that
we are now concerned.
The conscious two-thirds
of our life on earth
is measured by the degree
of attention we give sleep.
Our understanding of and delight
in what sleep has to bestow
will cause us night after
night to set out for it
as though we were keeping
an appointment with a lover.
"In a dream, in a vision of the night,
"when deep sleep falleth upon men
"in slumbering upon the bed,
"then he openeth the ears of men
"and sealeth their instruction," Job 33.
It is in sleep and in
prayer, a state akin to sleep
that man enters the subconscious
to make his impressions
and receive his instructions.
In these states, the
conscious and subconscious
are creatively joined, the male
and female become one flesh.
Sleep is the time when
the male or conscious mind
turns from the world of
sense to seek its lover
or subconscious self.
The subconscious, unlike
the woman of the world
who marries her husband to change him
has no desire to change
the conscious waking state,
but loves it as it is and
faithfully reproduces its likeness
in the outer world of form.
The conditions and events of your life
are your children formed from the molds
of your subconscious impressions in sleep.
They are made in the image and likeness
of your innermost feeling
that they may reveal you
to yourself.
As in heaven so on earth.
As in the subconscious so on earth.
Whatever you have in
consciousness as you go to sleep
is the measure of your expression
in the waking two thirds
of your life on earth.
Nothing stops you from
realizing your objective
save your failure to feel
that you are already that
which you wish to be
or that you are already in
possession of the thing sought.
Your subconscious gives
form to your desires
only when you feel your wish fulfilled.
The unconsciousness of sleep
is the normal state of the subconscious
because all things come
from within yourself
and your conception of yourself
determines that which comes.
You should always feel the wish fulfilled
before you drop off to sleep.
You never draw out of the deep of yourself
that what you want, you
always draw that which you are
and you are that which
you feel yourself to be
as well as that which you
feel as true of others.
To be realized then, the
wish must be resolved
into the feeling of being
or having or witnessing
the state sought.
This is accomplished by assuming
the feeling of the wish fulfilled.
The feeling which comes in
response to the question,
"How would I feel were my wish realized,"
is the feeling which should monopolize
and immobilize your attention
as you relax into sleep.
You must be in the
consciousness of being or having
that which you want to be or to have
before you drop off to sleep.
Once asleep, man has no freedom of choice.
His entire slumber is dominated
by his last waking concept of self.
It follows therefore that
he should always assume
the feeling of accomplishment
and satisfaction
before he retires in sleep.
Come before me with
singing and thanksgiving.
Enter into his gates with thanksgiving
and into his courts with praise.
Your mood prior to sleep
defines your state of consciousness
as you enter into the presence
of your everlasting lover,
the subconscious.
She sees you exactly as
you feel yourself to be.
If as you prepare for sleep,
you assume and maintain the
consciousness of success
by feeling I am successful,
you must be successful.
Lie flat on your back
with your head on a level with your body,
feel as you would were you
in possession of your wish
and quietly relax into unconsciousness.
He that keepeth Israel shall
neither slumber nor sleep.
Nevertheless, he giveth his beloved sleep.
The subconscious never sleeps.
Sleep is the door through
which the conscious waking mind
passes to be creatively
joined to the subconscious.
Sleep conceals the creative act
while the objective world reveals it.
In sleep, man impresses the subconscious
with his conception of himself.
What more beautiful description
of this romance of the conscious
and subconscious is there
than that told in the song of Solomon.
"By night on my bed, I sought
him whom my soul loveth.
"I found him whom my soul loveth.
"I held him and I would not let him go
"until I had brought him
into my mother's house
"and into the chamber of
her that conceived me."
Preparing to sleep you feel yourself
into the state of the answered wish
and then relax into unconsciousness.
Your realized wish is he whom you seek.
By night on your bed
you seek the feeling of the wish fulfilled
that you may take it
with you into the chamber
of her that conceived you,
into sleep or the subconscious
which gave you form that this wish
also may be given expression.
This is the way to discover
and conduct your wishes
into the subconscious.
Feel yourself in the
state of the realized wish
and quietly drop off to sleep.
Night after night, you should
assume the feeling of being,
having, and witnessing that
which you seek to be possessed
and see manifested.
Never go to sleep feeling
discouraged or dissatisfied.
Never sleep in the
consciousness of failure.
Your subconscious whose
natural state is sleep,
sees you as you believe yourself to be,
and whether it be good,
bad, or indifferent,
the subconscious will
faithfully embody your belief.
As you feel, so do you impress her.
And she the perfect lover
gives form to these impressions
and out-pictures them as
the children of her beloved.
Thou art all fair, my love,
there is no spot in thee.
Is the attitude of mind to adopt
before dropping off to sleep.
Disregard appearances
and feel that things are
as you wish them to be
for he calleth things
that are not seen as though they were
and the unseen becomes seen.
To assume the feeling of satisfaction
is to call conditions into being
which will mirror satisfaction.
Signs follow, they do not precede.
Proof that you are will
follow the consciousness
that you are,
it will not precede it.
You are an eternal dreamer
dreaming non-internal dreams.
Your dreams take form
as you assume the
feeling of their reality.
Do not limit yourself to the past.
Knowing that nothing is
impossible to consciousness,
begin to imagine states beyond
the experiences of the past.
Whatever the mind of man can
imagine, man can realize.
All objective visible
states were first subjective
invisible states,
and you called them into visible
by assuming the feeling of their reality.
The creative process is first imagining
and then believing the state imagined.
Always imagine and expect the best.
The world cannot change
until you change your conception of it.
As within so without.
Nations as well as people
are only what you believe them to be.
No matter what the problem
is, no matter where it is,
no matter whom it concerns
you have no one to change but yourself
and you have neither opponent nor helper
in bringing about the
change within yourself.
You have nothing to do but
convince yourself of the truth
of that which you desire
to see manifested.
As soon as you succeed
in convincing yourself
of the reality of the state sought,
results follow to confirm
your fixed belief.
You never suggest to another
the state which you desire
to see him express.
Instead, you convince
yourself that he is already
that which you desire him to be.
Realization of your wish is accomplished
by assuming the feeling
of the wish fulfilled.
You cannot fail unless you
fail to convince yourself
of the reality of your wish.
A change of belief is confirmed
by a change of expression.
Every night as you drop off to sleep,
feel satisfied and spotless
for your subjective lover
always forms the objective world
and the image and likeness
of your conception of it,
the conception defined by your feeling.
The waking two-thirds
of your life on earth
ever corroborates or bears witness
to your subconscious impressions.
The actions and events
of the day are effects,
they are not causes.
Free will is only freedom of choice.
Choose ye this day whom ye shall serve
is your freedom to choose
the kind of mood you assume,
but the expression of the mood
is the secret of the subconscious.
The subconscious receives impressions
only through the feelings of man
and in a way known only to itself
gives these impressions
form and expression.
The actions of man are determined
by his subconscious impressions.
His illusion of free will, his
belief and freedom of action
is but ignorance of the
causes which make him act.
He thinks himself free because
he has forgotten the link
between himself and the event.
Man awake is under compulsion to express
his subconscious impressions.
If in the past he unwisely
impressed himself,
then let him begin to change
his thought and feeling
for only as he does so
will he change his world.
Do not waste one moment in regret
for to think feelingly of
the mistakes of the past
is to reinfect yourself.
Let the dead bury the dead.
Turn from appearances
and assume the feeling that would be yours
were you already the one you wish to be.
Feeling a state produces that state.
The party you play on the world stage
is determined by your
conception of yourself.
By feeling your wish fulfilled
and quietly relaxing into sleep,
you cast yourself in a star role
to be played on earth tomorrow.
And while asleep,
you are rehearsed and
instructed in your part.
The acceptance of the end
automatically wills the
means of realization.
Make no mistake about this.
If, as you prepare for sleep,
you do not consciously feel yourself
into the state of the answered wish,
then you will take with
you into the chamber
of her who conceived you,
the sum total of the
reactions and feelings
of the waking day,
and while asleep you will
be instructed in the manner
in which they will be expressed tomorrow.
You will rise believing
that you are a free agent,
not realizing that every
action and event of the day
is predetermined by your concept
of self as you fell asleep.
Your only freedom then is
your freedom of reaction.
You are free to choose how you feel
and react to the day's drama,
but the drama, the actions, events,
and circumstances of the day
have already been determined.
Unless you consciously
and purposely define
the attitude of mind with
which you go to sleep,
you unconsciously go to sleep
in the composite attitude
of mind made up of all feelings
and reactions of the day.
Every reaction makes a
subconscious impression
and unless counteracted by an opposite
and more dominant feeling is
the cause of future action.
Ideas enveloped and feeling
are creative actions.
Use your divine right wisely.
Through your ability to think and feel
you have dominion over all creation.
While you are awake,
you are a gardener selecting
seed for your garden,
but except a corn of wheat
fall into the ground and die,
it abideth alone.
But if it die it bringeth
forth much fruit.
Your conception of
yourself as you fall asleep
is the seed you drop into the
ground of the subconscious.
Dropping off to sleep
feeling satisfied and happy
compels conditions and events
to appear in your world
which confirm these attitudes of mind.
Sleep is the door into heaven.
What you take in as a feeling
you bring out as a condition,
action, or object in space.
So sleep in the feeling
of the wish fulfilled.
As in consciousness so on earth.
Chapter three.
Prayer.
Prayer like sleep is also an
entrance into the subconscious.
When you pray, enter into your closet,
and when you have shut your
door, pray to your Father
which is in secret and your
Father which is in secret
shall reward you openly.
Prayer is an illusion of sleep,
which diminishes the
impression of the outer world
and renders the mind more receptive
to suggestion from within.
The mind in prayer is
in a state of relaxation
and receptivity akin
to the feeling attained
just before dropping off to sleep.
Prayer is not so much what you ask for,
as how you prepare for its reception.
Whatsoever things ye desire when ye pray
believe that you have received
them and ye shall have them.
The only condition required
is that you believe that your
prayers are already realized.
Your prayer must be answered
if you assume the feeling
that would be yours
were you already in
possession of your objective.
The moment you accept the
wish as an accomplished fact,
the subconscious finds
means for its realization.
To pray successfully then,
you must yield to the wish that
is feel the wish fulfilled.
The perfectly disciplined man
is always in tune with the
wish as an accomplished fact.
He knows that consciousness
is the one and only reality,
that ideas and feelings
are facts of consciousness
and are as real as objects in space.
Therefore he never entertains a feeling
which does not contribute to his happiness
for feelings are the causes
of the actions and
circumstances of his life.
On the other hand, the undisciplined man
finds it difficult to believe that
which is denied by the senses
and usually accepts or rejects solely
on appearances of the senses.
Because of this tendency
to rely on the evidence of the senses,
it is necessary to shut them
out before starting to pray,
before attempting to feel
that which they deny.
Whenever you are in this state of mind,
"I should like to, but I cannot,"
the harder you try the less you are able
to yield to the wish.
You never attract that which you want
but always attract that which
you are conscious of being.
Prayer is the art of
assuming the feeling of being
and having that which you want.
When the senses confirm
the absence of your wish,
all conscious effort to counteract
this suggestion is futile
and tends to intensify the suggestion.
Prayer is the art of yielding to the wish
and not the forcing of the wish.
Whenever your feeling is
in conflict with your wish,
feeling will be the victor.
The dominant feeling
invariably expresses itself.
Prayer must be without effort.
In attempting to fix an attitude of mind
which is denied by the
senses, effort is fatal.
To yield successfully to the
wish as an accomplished fact,
you must create a passive state,
a kind of reverie or meditative reflection
similar to the feeling
which proceeds sleep.
In such a relaxed state,
the mind is turned from
the objective world
and easily senses the reality
of a subjective state.
It is a state in which you are conscious
and quite able to move or open your eyes
but have no desire to do so.
An easy way to create this passive state
is to relax in a comfortable
chair or on a bed.
If on a bed, lie flat on your back
with your head on a level with your body,
close the eyes and imagine
that you are sleepy.
Feel I am sleepy,
so sleepy,
so very sleepy.
In a little while, a far away feeling
accompanied by a general
lassitude and loss of all desire
to move envelops you.
You feel a pleasant comfortable rest
and not inclined to alter your position,
although under other circumstances
you would not be at all comfortable.
When this passive state is reached,
imagine that you have realized your wish,
not how it was realized, but
simply the wish fulfilled.
Imagine in picture form what
you desire to achieve in life,
then feel yourself as
having already achieved it.
Thoughts produce tiny
little speech movements,
which may be heard in the
passive state of prayer
as pronouncements from without.
However, this degree of passivity
is not essential to the
realization of your prayers.
All that is necessary is
to create a passive state
and feel the wish fulfilled.
All you can possibly need
or desire is already yours.
You need no helper to give it to you,
it is yours now.
Call your desires into being
by imagining and feeling
your wish fulfilled.
As the end is accepted,
you become totally indifferent
as to possible failure
for acceptance of the end
wills the means to that end.
When you emerge from the moment of prayer,
it is as though you were shown
the happy and successful end of a play,
although you were not shown
how that end was achieved.
However, having witnessed the end,
regardless of any anticlimactic sequence
you remain calm and secure
in the knowledge that the end
has been perfectly defined.
Chapter four.
Spirit feeling.
Not by might nor by
power, but by my spirit,
saith the Lord of hosts.
Get into the spirit of the state desired
by assuming the feeling
that would be yours
were you already the one you want to be.
As you capture the feeling
of the state sought,
you are relieved of all
effort to make it so
for it is already so.
There was a definite feeling associated
with every idea in the mind of man.
Capture the feeling associated
with your realized wish
by assuming the feeling
that would be yours
were you already in possession
of the thing you desire
and your wish will objectify itself.
Faith is feeling.
According to your faith,
feeling, be it unto you.
You never attract that which you want,
but always that which you are.
As a man is, so does he see.
To him that hath it shall be given
and to him that hath not
it shall be taken away.
That which you feel yourself to be you are
and you are given that which you are.
So assume the feeling that would be yours
were you already in
possession of your wish
and your wish must be realized.
So God created man in his own image
in the image of God created he him.
Let this mind be in you which
was also in Christ Jesus,
who being in the form of God,
thought it not robbery
to be equal with God.
You are that which you
believe yourself to be.
Instead of believing in God or in Jesus,
believe you are God or you are Jesus.
He that believeth on me the
works that I do shall he do also
should be, he that believes as
I believe the works that I do
shall he do also.
Jesus found it not strange
to do the works of God
because he believed himself to be God.
I and my Father are one.
It is natural to do the works
of the one you believe yourself to be.
So live in the feeling of
being the one you want to be
and that you shall be.
When a man believes in the
value of the advice given him
and applies it,
he establishes within himself
the reality of success.